#### Name: Philip Dumaresq
#### Student Id: 40082638
#### Course: COMP 232
#### Professor: Nagi Basha

---

#### Question 1. Establish the following properties by induction or strong induction.
1. $\Sigma_{k=1}^{n} k^3 = \frac{n^2(n+1)^2}{4}$ for for all $n ≥ 1$.
2. $1 + \frac{1}{2} + \frac{1}{3} ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ \frac{1}{2^n} ≥ 1 + \frac{n}{2}$ for all $n ≥ 0$
3. Every positive integer $n$ can be represented as a sum of distinct powers of $2$, i.e., in the form $n = 2^{i_1} + ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ + 2^{1_h}$ with integers $0 ≤ i_1 < ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ < i_h$.
4. Let $D_n$ denote the number of ways to cover the squares of a $2$-by-$n$ board using plain dominos. Then it is easy to see that $D_1 = 1, D_2 = 2,$ and $D_3 = 3$. Compute a few more values of $D_n$ and guess an expression for the value of $D_n$ and use induction to prove you are right.


---

#### Question 2. Determine whether or not each of the following relations is a partial order and state whether or not each partial order is a total order.

1. $(\N × \N, ⪯)$, where $(a, b) ⪯ (c, d)$ if and only if $a ≤ c$.
2. $(\N × \N, ⪯)$, where $(a, b) ⪯ (c, d)$ if and only if $a ≤ c$ and $b ≥ d$.

---

#### Question 3. Which of the following relations on the set of all people are equivalence relations? Determine the properties of an equivalence relation that the others lack.

1. $\{(a, b) ∣ a \text{ and } b \text{ are the same age}\}$
    - **Reflexive**
    - **Symmetric** 
        - $a$ is the same age as $b$ $\therefore b$ is the same age as $a$
    - **Transitive** 
        - $a$ is the same age as $b$ and $b$ is the same age as $c$. $\therefore a$ is the same age as $c$
2. $\{(a, b) ∣ a \text{ and } b \text{ have the same parents}\}$
    - **Reflexive**
    - **Symmetric**
        - $a$ has the same parents as $b$ $\therefore b$ has the same parents as a 
    - **Transitive** 
        - $a$ has the same parents as $b$, and $b$ has the same parents as $c, \therefore a$ has the same parents as $c$.
3. $\{(a, b) ∣ a \text{ and } b \text{ share a common parent}\}$
    -  **Reflexive**
    -  **Symmetric**
        -  $a$ shares a parent with $b, \therefore b$ shares a parent with $a$
    -  **Not Transitive**
        -  $a$ shares a parent with $b$, and $b$ shares a parent with $c$, but $a$ doesn't necessarily share a parent with $c$. 
4. $\{(a, b) ∣ a \text{ and } b \text{ have met}\}$
    - **Reflexive**
    - **Symmetric** 
        - $a$ has met $b, \therefore b$ has met $a$
    - **Not transitive**
        - $a$ has met $b$ and $b$ has met $c$ but $a$ has not necessarily met $c$
5. $\{(a, b) ∣ a \text{ and } b \text{ speak a common language}\}$
    - **Reflexive**
    - **Symmetric** 
        - $a$ speaks a common language with $b, \therefore b$ speaks a common language with $a$
    - **Not transitive**
        - $a$ speaks a common language with $b$ and $b$ speaks a common language with $c$ but $a$ doesn't not necessarily speak a common language with $c$

---

#### Question 4. Consider the following relation $≃$ defined on the set $N × Z+$. $(m_1, n_1) ≃ (m_2, n_2)$ iff $m_1n_2 = m_2n_1$.
1. Prove that it is an equivalence and find equivalence classes.
2. Provide a concise characterization of the equivalence classes in terms of rational numbers

---

#### Question 5. Consider the following relation $≺$ over reals: $x ≺ y$ iff $(x−y) ∈ Z$. Prove that it is an equivalence and characterize its equivalence classes

---

#### Question 6. A set $S$ of jobs can be ordered by writing $x ≤ y$ to mean that either $x = y$ or $x$ must be done before $y$, for all $x$ and $y$ in $S$. Given the Hasse diagram represented in Figure 1 for this relation for a particular set $S$ of jobs, show the following:
1. minimal, least, maximal, and greatest elements;
2. a topological sort.

---

#### Question 7. Determine whether the posets with these Hasse diagrams are lattices.

---

#### Question 8. Determine whether the following posets are lattices:
1. $(1, 3, 6, 9, 12, ∣)$
2. $(1, 5, 25, 125, ∣)$
3. $(Z, ≥)$
4. $(P(S), ⊇)$, where $P(S)$ is the power set of a set $S$.

---

#### Question 9. Let $R$ be a relation on $N$ defined by $(x, y) ∈ R$ iff there is a prime $p$ such that $y = px$. Describe in words the reflexive, symmetric and transitive closures of $R$, denoted by $r$, $s$ and $t$, respectively.
1. Which of the following are true:
    - $r(s(R)) = s(r(R))$
    - $r(t(R)) = t(r(R))$
    - $s(t(R)) = t(s(R))$
You need to justify your answer.
2. Which of them hold for all relations on $\N$?
3. Using the reflexive, symmetric, and transitive closures, express the smallest equivalence relation containing an arbitrary relation.
4. What is the smallest partial order containing $R$?
